+++
title = 'Creating my personal page with Hugo'
date = 2023-11-12T12:11:12+02:00
draft = false
showtoc = true
tocopen = false
tags = ['hugo']
+++

Today I decided to FINALLY create my personal page (the page you are reading right now) with a static page creation tool. I picked [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/) after some research. I liked the facts that it is fast, written in Go (I like Go!), it offers full customization and you don't need to install anything apart from the application itself which is available in all platforms.

In the rest of the post, I want to share with you some of the instructions I have followed while creating the site.

## Installation and initial setup

In my case, I had to execute:

```sh
sudo pacman -S hugo
```

Hugo has excellent documentation with all the details that you need to create and customize your page. Definitely read the [Getting started](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/) section to get started with Hugo.

To create the hugo site you execute:

```sh
hugo new site <hame>
```

```txt
Congratulations! Your new Hugo site was created in /data/ubuntu/dimitris/git/hugo/testing.

Just a few more steps...

1. Change the current directory to ............./<name>.
2. Create or install a theme:
   - Create a new theme with the command "hugo new theme <THEMENAME>"
   - Install a theme from https://themes.gohugo.io/
3. Edit hugo.toml, setting the "theme" property to the theme name.
4. Create new content with the command "hugo new content <SECTIONNAME>/<FILENAME>.<FORMAT>".
5. Start the embedded web server with the command "hugo server --buildDrafts".
```

You already get some useful feedback from Hugo about the next steps. That's nice!

```sh
cd <name>
```

What took me most of the time was to decide which theme to use. Picking one out of hundreds of themes at [Hugo Themes](https://themes.gohugo.io/) was not easy. I would have liked some kind of better filtering there... but anyway. Once I realized that the order was according to GitHub Stars I visited the [PaperMod](https://github.com/adityatelange/hugo-PaperMod) theme. I wanted a theme offering Dark, Blog, and Minimal and this fitted my requirements. It's documentation seemed quite detailed so I took the decision to use it.

Following the documentation I executed:

```sh
git init
```

to initialize a git repository and then

```sh
git submodule add --depth=1 https://github.com/adityatelange/hugo-PaperMod.git themes/PaperMod
```

to add the theme as a submodule inside the `themes` folder.

The site configuration can be either in a `hugo.toml` or `hugo.yaml` file. Hugo comes with a `toml` file. I decided to change the file to `yaml` syntax since I am more familiar with it. I deleted the `hugo.toml` file and created a `hugo.yaml` file with the following content:

```yaml
baseURL: ""
languageCode: en-us
title: Dimitris Dranidis
theme: PaperMod
```

And now you have an empty site that you can test with:

```sh
hugo server -D
```

The -D is for draft pages to appear (more on this later). Keep this server running since hugo offers hot reload on all changes.

Notice the `title` of the site and the `theme` being used.

## Content creation

Content creation is very easy. Just execute:

```sh
hugo new content posts/my-first-post.md
```

and Hugo will create a `my-first-post.md` file in the `posts` folder under the `content` folder. All your content is in markdown files that are organized within your `content` folder. The new file already has some metadata:

```toml
+++
title = 'My First Post'
date = 2023-11-12T22:40:04+02:00
draft = true
+++
```

which is generated by Hugo using the `default.md` template at the `archetypes` folder. As you can see this uses the `toml` syntax. You can edit the template to make it generate `yaml` as metadata.

Change the title of the metadata to whatever you wish to appear as title of your post and below the metadata add some markdown content. Save and and you can already preview at the running server.

## Adding a menu

If you want a menu add the following to your `hugo.yaml` file:

```yaml
menu:
  main:
    - identifier: posts
      name: Posts
      url: /posts/
      weight: 10
    - identifier: tags
      name: Tags
      url: /tags/
      weight: 20
    - identifier: search
      name: Search
      url: /search/
      weight: 30
```

Add the following metadata to your post: `tags = ['tag1', 'tag2']
` to display some tags. Visit the tags page.

> NOTE
>
> I noticed that sometimes the page might display an error or not reload properly. In these cases I found out that saving the `hugo.yaml` file resolves the problem.

## Adding the Search page

The `Search` link will display a `404`. Execute:

```sh
hugo new content search.md
```

to create it and then change its metadata to:

```yaml
---
title: "Search" # in any language you want
layout: "search" # is necessary
# description: "Description for Search"
summary: "search"
placeholder: "start typing here ..."
---
```

## Adding some intro

To add some intro to the home page add to the `hugo.yaml` file:

```yaml
params:
  homeInfoParams:
    title: Some fancy text ...
    Content: This is my personal blog....
  socialIcons:
    - name: github
      url: "https://github.com/username"
    - name: linkedin
      url: "https://linkedin.com/in/username"
```

Change the `url` links to the correct ones.

## Conclusion

Already looking good, isn't it?

I think the developers of Hugo and of the themes have done some excellent work. I really like the fact that everything is a file and all the content is in markdown format.

If however there is something you don't like, you can change the underlying html, css and js files to whatever you like.

For more customizations of Hugo and its theme read the extended documentation. Everything is explained in good detail.
